Ayvalık is a city in the Northern Aegean region of Turkey, on the south coast of the Gulf of Edremit, connected by bridges to the resort of Cunda island. It was Greek for much of its history and is within view of Lesvos. The city's ancient name was Kydonia — both names refer to quince, but the city has long been surrounded by olive trees.

The 1923 Treaty of Lausanne brought population exchanges: Greeks were deported from mainland Turkey while Turks from Crete were resettled here. This was one of the better-matched exchanges, as Cretan architecture, street life and cuisine had much in common with those of the former Kydonia. This heritage is nowadays the distinctive feature of Ayvalık. To a greater extent than elsewhere, you will find elegant mansions, traditional East Mediterranean houses, and cobbled alleys suffused with the perfume of frying fish.

Taksiyarhis Church on the mainland was built in 1844. It was disused after its Orthodox congregation were deported and had a spell as a tobacco and alcohol warehouse, but in 2013 was restored as a museum. Entry is 3 Euro. Saatli Camii (Clock Mosque), a Greek Orthodox church of 1850, was converted into a mosque in 1928 with the minaret added but the interior little changed. It is on Çarşı Sk, 100 m southwest of Taksiyarhis Church. Çınarlı Mosque nearby is another neo-classical Greek church turned into a mosque.

Panagia Phaneromeni is a holy spring with an 800-year-old tradition, restored from 2015 in neo-Classical style. The old houses in this neighbourhood are in better shape than elsewhere in Ayvalık. Çamlık is a southern suburb with upmarket neo-classical mansions. Küçükköy Town Museum is a small free museum of the area, in a courtyard with a mosque and cafe.

Şeytan Sofrası (Devil's Table) is a breezy hilltop south of town with a restaurant where visitors come to watch the sunset. A mark in the rock is said to be Satan's footprint.

Cunda Island is the popular name for the islands linked to town by the toll-free Gönül Bridge and Ayvalık Strait Bridge. Alibey Island is the main island. Taksiyarhis Church on Alibey was built in 1873 and is now the Rahmi M. Koç automobile museum; entry is 20 TL. Sevim and Necdet Kent Library just north has icons and frescoes rescued from Orthodox churches. Old houses line the alleys around the church and library. Hamidiye Mosque on the seafront, completed in 1897, is another landmark.

Sarımsaklı Beach, 8 km south of town, is a broad sandy beach 7 km long with lots of restaurants and hotels. Altinova Beach is 13 km south of town. The Ayvalık Islands Nature Park encompasses some three dozen islands, and boat trips sometimes visit their quiet coves.

Scuba diving is popular around the islands, with Ayvalık 3 Sea Diving Center running boat trips. Watching the sunset from Şeytan Sofrası is a must-do experience.

Everything related to olives is available in Ayvalık: olive oil, brined olives, castile soap. "Perşembe Pazarı" means Thursday market and takes place in the town back streets.

Seafood is the specialty here — a local saying invokes the unholy trinity of "Rakı, Balık, Ayvalık." Eating places are clustered downtown and in the village on Cunda island, where "Meyhane" indicates tables lined along an alley. Ayvalık Tostu is a local toasted sandwich with cheese, sausage, pickles, and condiments. Other local delicacies include stuffed squash blossom (kabak çiçeği dolması), which replaces the grapevine leaves of the typical Turkish dolma with squash flowers. In town, notable options include Açelya Cafe, Köfteci Yusuf, İyimiş Meyhane, Tamam Meyhane, and İki Tek Meyhane. The Cunda island eating strip along Mevlana Cd includes Lokma İmparatoru, Cunda Sahil, Lal Girit Mutfağı, Sardunya, and L'arancia Cunda.

Downtown pubs include The Shelby, White Knight, Pena Wine House and Kraft Ayvalık. Cunda island pubs are a block back from the waterfront, including Kara Kedi, Laterna, Cielo Bistro, and La Fuga.

Ayvalık has lots of accommodation in three main areas: the town, Cunda island, and Sarımsaklı Beach. Carpe Diem Otel on Atatürk Blv is a good central mid-price place with B&B doubles from 1000 TL. Villa Pietra on Gümrük Cd is a charming boutique hotel with B&B doubles from 2000 TL. Antikhan Otel on Cumhuriyet Cd is a pleasant family-run guesthouse in an old Greek house, with B&B doubles from 500 TL. On Cunda island, Otel Deniz on Mevlana Cd offers beachfront rooms with B&B doubles from 1200 TL. Ada Camping, 6 km west of the island village, is a clean well-run campsite at 250 TL per person per night. Sözer Otel on İnönü Cd is a simple beachfront hotel with small but clean modern rooms. Ayvalık Sea Resort on Sarımsaklı beach offers B&B doubles from 1200 TL.

Bergama to the southeast has the substantial Graeco-Roman ruins of Pergamon, reachable via a scenic country lane across the old-growth stone pine forests of the Kozak plateau. Edremit to the northeast is the main town of a string of beach resorts around the gulf. Foça on the north fringes of İzmir is another small port that has preserved its Greek architecture. İzmir to the south is a busy modern city with much to explore.
