Datça is the main town of the Datça or Reşadiye Peninsula, a scenic 70-km neck of land that forms the boundary between the Aegean and Mediterranean Seas. It is rugged, forested, and in 2020 had a population of 23,711. The main tourist attraction, at its west tip, is the ruins of Knidos.

The ancient city of Knidos was famous for its temple housing the Aphrodite of Knidos, wrought in Parian marble by Praxiteles of Athens around 364 BC and likely modelled on the Athenian courtesan Phryne. She is the earliest classical sculpture of a full-sized erotic nude female, depicted shedding her drape to enter a ritual bath. She appeared on coins and every wealthy collector wanted a copy. Of the surviving copies, the Colonna Venus in the Vatican's Museo Pio-Clementino is believed to be the closest to the original, which was likely transferred to Constantinople and destroyed in a fire of 475 AD.

Sights along the peninsula include Bürdübet, a village flanked by coves on a paved but narrow side-loop through the forests. Bencik Koyu is a cove on the south coast where the peninsula pinches to its narrowest at 800 m wide — according to Herodotus, the people of Knidos tried to cut a canal through here. Balıkaşıran is a quiet cove on the north coast whose name means "where the fish leaps across." Hurmalıbük is a cove with no road access, usually reached by boat, and one of the few places with a stand of Phoenix theophrasti, the Cretan date palm, the only palm species native to Turkey.

Karaincir is one of the most developed coves for visitors, along a beach of white sand. It is good for children as the sea is only thigh-high 150 m out. The ruin of an Apollo temple at the east end of the village is incompletely excavated.

Hızırşah Culture House was the Greek Orthodox Taksiarhon Church, built in the 19th century, now sometimes used for cultural events and exhibitions. Nearby, the Hızırşah Mosque dates from the mid-14th century Menteşe beylik era, and the traditional Turkish gulet boat is modelled on their fleet.

Eski Datça, 3 km inland from the present centre, was the main village until the 1940s. It is a charming village of narrow, mostly car-free cobbled streets and cubical Mediterranean stone houses. Reşadiye was the district capital during the Ottoman Empire and has some architectural heritage.

Aktur is a resort village straggling along a bay. Hayıtbükü has a short strip of accommodation and eateries along the beach, as does Ovabükü just west. Palamutbükü, 25 km west of Datça town, has the longest beachfront and was developed as a secondary resort with cheap hotels, guesthouses and restaurants. Murdala has the longest beach on the north coast, pebble, accessed by a gravel road.

Knidos (Knidos Antik Kenti) is the ruin of an ancient city at the west tip of the peninsula. It was a small trading port from 1100 BC, became the area's main town around 330 BC, and was inhabited until 500 AD. It occupied the island of Triopion and adjacent mainland, joined by a causeway that created two harbours. Visible ruins include a Roman sundial, the stairs of the circular temple that housed the Aphrodite, an amphitheatre, city walls, and the necropolis. Open daily Apr–Oct 09:00–20:00, Nov–Mar 09:00–17:00, entry 50 TL.

Boat trips sail from Datça harbour, with half a dozen operators. Horse riding is available at Datça Binicilik Merkezi near Eski Datça. The bluffs above Hızırşah have a dozen or so rock climbing routes. The Carian Trail, an 820 km hiking trail, passes through the peninsula with 241 km of routes.

Almonds grow here, and a local delicacy is a dessert made of almond and dried figs. Cafe Inn on Atatürk Cd is a friendly harbourside cafe with Italian and Mediterranean food. Yakamengen serves traditional Mediterranean food in a "mengen," a former olive mill. Baba Lokantası offers good home-cooked food at very affordable prices.

Local wine is produced at Knidos Winery just north of Eski Datça and at Datça Vineyard 7 km east on D400. Vena is a tavern serving beer and wine in Eski Datça, open daily 16:30–02:30.

Accommodation on the peninsula is in small independent places, as package holiday companies and chain hotels do not venture west of Marmaris. Fuda Otel on Datça town beach offers B&B doubles from 4000 TL. Yavuz Apart Hotel has clean doubles from 1500 TL. Tunç Pansiyon is a simple white-washed apartment block, clean and value-for-money. Villa Tokur, a smart B&B a short walk up the hill, has B&B doubles from 3000 TL. Iskandil Apart Hotel is a small apartment hotel near Palamutbükü beach.

Marmaris is the sprawling resort at the foot of the peninsula, the gateway to the rest of Turkey. Bozburun is the other peninsula branching south. Bodrum, reached by ferry or a roundabout road, has more historic sights.
