Cappadocia (Turkish: Kapadokya) is an area within South Central Anatolia in Turkey, with a surreal landscape dotted with underground cities, cave churches and houses carved in the rocks.

Ortahisar is a historically central town dominated by a large rock castle, known for its traditional neighbourhoods and authentic atmosphere. Nevşehir is the capital and transport hub for the region, with a castle hill riddled with underground dwellings and the underground cities of Kaymakli and Derinkuyu to the south. Göreme is the main tourist base, amidst a rich landscape of fairy chimneys and rock churches. Uçhisar has pinnacles carved into castles, and a scenic canyon leads down to Göreme. Ürgüp has more cave dwellings and rock cones. Avanos is known for pottery, with the hoodoo landscape starting a few km south at Paşabağ valley. Güzelyurt is an outlier to the southwest, where the best attraction is Ihlara Valley.

Between 9 and 3 million years ago, eruptions of Mount Erciyes and Mount Hasan covered the area in fine ash particles, which welded together and packed down into a deep layer of tuff. This soft rock erodes easily, persisting only in dry climates or where protected by harder rock overlays. Where it outcrops at the rim of a plateau, rainfall and wind sculpt the tuff into domes, cones and columns known as "hoodoos." Typically there is a cascade of large formations at the rim, middling columns below, and the oldest statue-sized pieces at the bottom of the field. The vagaries of erosion are exaggerated where caps of harder rock remain, twisting into "fairy chimneys" with colours ranging from pink to green and yellow.

Tuff can be quarried and dressed as masonry, but it is much easier to hollow it out into dwellings, storage cellars, stables and ritual spaces. Such cave castles are also easier to defend or conceal. In many places these linked up to create entire underground cities, with 40 known and more being discovered. The Cappadocians were early adopters of Christianity, and most cave dwellings were hewn out between 100 and 800 AD. Many caves have found modern use, including as hotels.

Cappadocia has a semi-arid, continental climate with hot dry summer days, chilly nights, and cold snowy winters. Spring brings the Kırkikindi thunderstorms of inland Anatolia with heavy downpours. Fall is mild and dry, making it the best time to visit, especially in September.

Sunrise and sunset are the best times to see the rock formations, with slanting light colouring them and casting deep shadows. Castles here means large pinnacles carved out into extensive habitations, such as those at Uçhisar. Nevşehir has a conventional hilltop bastion where in 2015 they discovered a great warren of dwellings beneath it. Ottoman mansions were built above ground with local stone but often extended back into the hillside. Many were homes of prosperous Greeks until they were deported in the 1923 population exchanges. Tiny cliff-side dwellings with doors less than 10 cm high were pigeon coops, and the guano was collected for fertiliser and whitewash. The canyon between Uçhisar and Göreme is called Pigeon Valley for this reason.

The best underground cities to visit are Kaymakli and Derinkuyu, south of Nevşehir. Dozens of churches exist above and below ground, fairly plain early on but becoming richly frescoed from the 9th century. The open-air museum 1 km east of Göreme has a fine collection. The Museumpass Cappadocia version is valid for 3 days and costs 2000 TL.

Hiking trails vary from easy strolls through wacky sculpture-park landscapes to long treks through the canyons. Hot air balloons launch at sunrise for the lightest winds and the best viewing of the rock formations, typically a one-hour ride in a 20-person basket. Göreme has the biggest concentration of balloon operators.

The towns all have small stores for basics, plus artisan and gift shops for carpets, kilims and pottery. Local dishes include Mantı, a ravioli dumpling with minced meat served with yoghurt and garlic sauce. Sirdan is lamb or sheep intestines grilled with spices and lemon. Testi kebap features meat and vegetables cooked in a clay pot sealed with bread dough, which is broken open when serving. Pastirmali kuru fasulye is white beans with spiced meat. Cappadocia is a major wine-producing region, and some vineyards have outlet wine shops.

Cave hotels are the specialty of Cappadocia. They come in various price ranges but are comfortable with all modern amenities, though you may have difficulty finding your way between lobby and room through the bizarre rock formations. Ottoman mansions are atmospheric and may have cave rooms but are mostly above ground. Standard modern hotels are a safer bet for visitors with limited mobility.

Aksaray is a laid-back city and hub for attractions such as Ihlara Valley or Tuz Gölü, the salt lake. Konya, the home of Sufi poet and thinker Rumi, has outstanding Seljuk architecture. Kayseri is on the route east, with museums, mosques and a 15th century castle.
