Kuşadası is a beach resort in the Central Aegean region of Turkey, 95 km south of İzmir, with a resident population of 113,580 that doubles in summer with tourists and seasonal workers. "Kuş adası" means "bird island," referring to the shape of Pigeon Island. In antiquity this was a small port overshadowed by Ephesus inland. The big development came from the 1970s when the Turkish Aegean coast became a budget to mid-price destination for package tours, and Kuşadası nowadays sprawls over 25 km of coastline. It has few antiquities of its own but is close to must-see Ephesus and other sights.

Pigeon Island (Güvercinada) is reached from town by a 200 m causeway. The castle has been restored as a museum, open during daylight hours. Nearby, the Öküz Mehmed Pasha Caravanserai by the harbour entrance is a restored Ottoman Kervansaray built in 1615–18, a secure place for merchants to lodge with their goods. Kaleiçi Mosque, 100 m south on Barbaros Boulevard, was built alongside the Caravanserai by the same patron.

The Micro Miniature Museum on Sağlık Cd is an oddity — an old turret housing an exhibition of miniature art viewed through microscopes. Entry 20 TL. The Olive Oil Museum off Davutlar Rd showcases 2500 years of olive oil manufacturing techniques. Entry 35 TL, open daily 09:00–18:00.

Zeus Cave (Zeus Mağarası) near Güzelçamlı is a cavern with a 10 m deep brackish pool where a karstic spring channel mingles with sea water, and the minerals stain it deep blue. According to legend, Zeus hid here from Poseidon. Free entry, open 24 hours.

Dilek Peninsula National Park encompasses Mount Samsun, which juts out towards the island of Samos, covered with dense forests. Visitors might see wild boar or wild horses. There are many hiking trails and secluded beaches, plus crumbling monastic ruins. Since 1994 the park extends south into the Büyük Menderes Delta. Entry on foot or bicycle 13 TL, by car 39 TL.

Ephesus, the magnificent Roman site, is 15 km northeast and an easy day trip by dolmuş or taxi. Selçuk, a further 4 km east, was the original site of Ephesus and has a museum, ancient citadel, and attractions such as the House of Mary. Magnesia on the Maeander south of Gümuşyeniköy features ancient Greco-Roman city ruins with a large stadium seating 30 thousand spectators, one of the largest in Asia Minor. Entry 20 TL.

The beaches are long and sandy with a shallow drop-off, safe for children. Ladies Beach (Kadınlar Denizi Plajı) was for women only in Ottoman times but has long been mixed. Being close to town it gets very crowded; a couple of recliners and parasol for the afternoon costs around 100 TL. Long Beach stretches 10 km down to Güzelçamlı with multiple access points and sections named Davutlar, Sevgi, and Venus. Pigale Beach going north is quieter. Pamucak Beach is at the end of the long northern strip.

Restaurants serving kebabs and fish are ubiquitous, but the best are along the pedestrianised alleys inland from the port. Casablanca on Adnan Menderes Blv gets great reviews for service and cuisine at this meat-oriented place, which also caters well to vegetarians. Murphys next door also gets good reviews.

Efes beer is named for nearby Ephesus and brewed in İzmir. The beach cafes mostly serve alcohol, while the free-standing pubs are in old town near the port.

Sözer Hotel on Atatürk Blv is a friendly 3-star hotel with B&B doubles from 700 TL. Hotel Panorama on Kıbrıs Cd has basic backpacker rooms just south of the harbour. Sezgin Hotel on Aslanlar Cd is a guesthouse in old town with en-suite bathrooms, balconies and air-con, with B&B doubles from 600 TL. Hotel Süer is placed on a hilltop with great sunset views and offers free pick-ups. Sealight Resort on Yavansu is a lively, comfortable resort hotel. Palm Wings Resort is a smart resort hotel on the south beach strip. Kuştur Club Holiday Village on the north beach strip offers all-inclusive stays with B&B doubles from 3000 TL.

Didim is a resort town to the south, close to the ancient sites of Didyma, Miletus and Priene. The Greek island of Samos is an easy day trip by ferry — in 2025 a day trip costs 37 Euro and an open return 47 Euro, with daily sailings from April to October.
