Urfa (also Şanlıurfa, formerly Edessa) is a city in Southeastern Anatolia and the provincial capital of Şanlıurfa Province. The city is about 80 km east of the Euphrates River, with a population of around 600 thousand.

Urfa has many excellent old buildings and plenty of connections with the Old Testament and Islamic tradition. The general vibe is absolutely Middle Eastern, with traditional yellow stone, arched architecture, and people in traditional attire. When approaching from the west, the city feels like the gates of the eastern world. People are extremely friendly, and the bazaar is great.

Like most of Southeastern Turkey, Urfa's climate is semi-arid and subcontinental with extremely hot dry summers and cool, occasionally rainy, sporadically snowy winters. Average summer temperatures are above 38°C (100°F), far more intense than Central Anatolia or even the Mediterranean coast. Summers have cloudless skies and very little rain. Spring and fall are both mild to warm, except for September which is still hot, and are the ideal times to visit. Winters are somewhat chilly with regular frosts and occasional rain that can get heavy in the transition to spring.

Göbekli Tepe is located about 30 minutes from the city by bus. Dated to 9000 BCE and listed by UNESCO as a world heritage site, it has changed the way archaeologists look at history as it pre-dates farming. If it is a temple, as some think, it is the oldest yet found in the world. Entry costs 20 Euro. Bus 0 runs from the Archaeology Museum every hour on the 45-minute mark, with travel time of about 30 minutes.

The Şanlıurfa Archaeology and Mosaic Museum is the largest museum in Turkey, covering the history of the region from the Paleolithic to the Ottoman period. It contains impressive real-size reconstructions of Göbekli Tepe that you can walk through, and many artifacts from the nearby Atatürk Dam and Harran. The museum has two sections including a Mosaic exhibit south of the main building. Reserve at least 2 hours for a proper visit. Entry costs 100 TL.

The Necropolis (Kızılkoyun Nekropolü) east of the museum features extensive tombs visible from the street, free to view.

The Cave of Abraham is an important Islamic place of pilgrimage, as Urfa is believed to have been the birthplace of the Prophet Abraham. Around the cave are several mosques built around a park with water features. The Halil-ur-Rahman Mosque has a pool known as Balıklıgöl, occupied by a large number of holy fish. According to legend, Nemrut wanted to burn Abraham as a sacrifice, but God intervened and turned the pyre into water and the coals into fish, saving Abraham. Legend also names the site as the birthplace of Job. Visitors can join the locals and make a wish while feeding the fish. According to local belief, feeding one of the rare white fish will make your wish come true. Designated fish food is available from vendors around the pond.

Şanlıurfa Castle features ancient ruined walls dating from around 814 AD on the rocky promontory at the south side of town. The views are spectacular, with almost mystical crimson and hazy views from the terrace over the old city during the evening call to prayer. The atmospheric bazaar with its hustle and bustle is quite charming.

Abraham's Path is an international trekking route following the footsteps of the Patriarch Abraham throughout the Middle East. Walks from 1 to 10 days in length are possible from Urfa, linking the city's sacred sites.

As Urfa is a hot place, headscarves are popular with both men and women. Particular to Urfa is a shade of lavender with white embroidered or sequined patterns, found in the bazaar. Patterned Poshi scarves are also popular purchases; Kurdish men wear black and white check, and Arab men the red and white ones.

The çiğ köfte or raw kebabs are famous — in winter made with raw mince meat, in summer with fried egg. Breakfast at Zahter Kahvaltı in Köprübaşı Caddesi is excellent. Urfa is famous for local pistachio desserts found in every bakery in the city center.

As a city of pilgrimage, beer or any other alcoholic beverage is near impossible to get. Try shakes, freshly squeezed juice, or Turkish and Arabian tea (which is sweeter or minted). Drink "murra" in the Gümrük Han — a very strong half-teaspoon-sized cup of coffee unique to the area. More welcoming to the palate is Menengiç coffee, made from a paste of coffee and wild pistachio beans, giving it a sweet, nutty flavour. A few small bars can be found just over the Karakoyun River, playing local Kurdish and Turkish music.

Yuvacali Village Home Stays in Hilvan offers visitors the chance to experience Kurdish hospitality with activities like milking sheep, making bread, and sleeping under the stars. From €30 per person. Aslan Guest House on 12 Eylül Caddesi is a backpacker-friendly guesthouse set in an elegant nineteenth century Armenian-built house, with rooms around a central courtyard and fountain. Dorm beds from €7.20, doubles with private bath from €18. Hotel Arte on Atatürk Bulvarı offers 33 individually designed rooms with wireless internet, air-con, and satellite TV. Beyzade Otel is housed inside a historic mansion with nice rooms. The Hilton Garden Inn is a 4-star hotel with comfortable rooms near the old bus terminal. The Pilgrim Guesthouse at the Holy Pond offers a unique experience in the caravanserai tradition — you are provided with a straw mat and quilt in the colonnade surrounding the courtyard. The gate shuts after the night prayer around 10 PM.

Harran, about 45 km south, features reconstructed beehive huts and the remains of the oldest university. Mardin, about 200 km east, offers stonework architecture and Syriac Orthodox churches. Nemrut, the mountain of gods, and Diyarbakır are both within a day's reach. Halfeti is a riverside old town partially swallowed by a dam lake. The Atatürk Dam to the north is a huge engineering project harnessing the waters of the Euphrates. Karacadağ is where wheat first originated about 8800 BCE, and it is still possible to see nomads in their yurts.
